# DATA605_Message_Queue
DATA605 Project

**What is RabbitMQ**

Welcome to Kaizenflow. Here, we created a basic message queue using the technology RabbitMQ. A message queue is a basic fundamental concept in computer programming and software development. For this one, we used RabbitMQ, which is an open source message broker that was developed by Pivotal Software, that is used for message queue technology. It utilizes AMQP, short for Advanced Message Queuing Protocol, for communication between services. It is written in Erlang, and it is built on the Open Telecom Platform framework for clustering and fallover. Client libraries to interface with this broker are all usable for major programming languages. As a message queue, it serves to manage the routing, queuing, and delivery of messages from senders (publishers/producers) to receivers (consumers). It has a versatile publish-subscribe model, where messages are sent as "exchanges", routing them to relevant queues depending on the configurable rules. It uses a variety of messaging patterns, such as point-to-point, fan-out, and topic-based, and request-response, making it incredibly adaptable to diverse needs. The main kinds of problems RabbitMQ as a technology intends to solve are quite a few. The first is its ability to decouple applications, allowing more scalable and reliable applications that can communicate with one another without being a monolith. It also helps to build 12-factor architectures, designing applications as a loosely coupled services in a collection with one another. It can also improve the performance of applications by implementing asynchronous communication, sending and receiving messages without blocking the sender or the receiver in doing so. It also performs a variety of other tasks with messages, such as real-time streaming (live chat), load balancing of messages, providing fallover in case message sending fails, as well as auditing (tracking) who sent messages.

One of the main similar technologies that RabbitMQ competes with is Apache Kafka. However, unlike Kafka, RabbitMQ routes messages based on a rule, as opposed to Kafka's use of publishing and subscribing to a topic from publishers and consumers. The result is that Kafka message receivers who are subscribed to a given partition will receive any messages sent to that partition no matter what, but routed messages from RabbitMQ can be filtered by consumers to specify which messages they are specifically interested in receiving and which messages they are not interested in receiving. RabbitMQ also delivers messages in an ordered sequence, which isn't the case with Kafka due to data partitioning. However, with RabbitMQ, there is no guarantee about what order these messages are sent to a queue or exchange. It will send in a set order so long as there is only one message consumer, but it may be less consistent if we have multiple message receivers. Because Kafka involves data partitioning, it may process messages sent to the same partition in a desired order, which it does by default using a round robin partitioner. However, the producer also has input in how Kafka messages are partitioned. RabbitMQ is push-based, pushing messages to its consumers, whereas Kafka is a pull-based system that requires the consumers to always be pulling for new messages from the server. RabbitMQ also evicts messages once they are consumed, whereas Kafka may preserve them for a determined length of time until that retention period expires. RabbitMQ is, however, effective at having tools to handle failures of a system such as dead-letter exchanges and delivery retries to prevent message failures, whereas with Kafka, it is incumbent upon the producer to create their own failure management systems.

The pros of using RabbitMQ as a message queue are quite a few. The first is that it is relatively simple to use, using a smart-broker and dumb-consumer model. It is good at being managed by the producer to sent messages and filter them between publish and consumer in an effective and relatively automated ways. Thanks to its routing system, it is very effective at exchange of messages between publisher and consumer. It can filter messages based on topic, which means consumers and publishers alike can establish communications using this technology
